# The Venus of Paphos and her Temple.

## By Joseph-Daniel Guigniaut,

### Professor of Greek Literature, etc.

### Extract from _The Monthly Review_, Vol. 11.

## Paris. June 1829.

---

The student of human nature cannot with impunity neglect researches into antiquity. To obtain just notions of society as it now exists, we must trace it from its feeble beginnings, to its greatest known development, watch its increase, its modifications, its vicissitudes, and learn exactly to appreciate every successive form through which it has paseed. It is unquestionably an easy matter to affect a disdain for the wanderings of man's intellect, before the light of truth burst in upon it. But this contempt, even were it real and well-founded, will not satisfy the mind. It is more agreeable to understand than to despise our forefathers; and therefore, researches into their opinions, particularly such as regarded their religion and philosophy, possess peculiar attractions for every individual above a mere newspaper or novel reader.

Before we enter upon any examination of the dissertation of Monsieur Guigniaut, it may, perhaps, be useful to trace from other sources, a rapid sketch of the history of the worship of beauty, which, according to the best authorities, sprung up together with most other forms of superstition, in the East, and gradually found its way into Greece, where it attained a perfection and consistency unknown to its original inventors. About the middle of the last century, the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, of Paris, proposed as the subject of a prize essay, "An inquiry concerning the various names and attributes of Venus, among the different nations of Greece and Italy; the origin and reason of those attributes; the nature of her worship; the celebrated temples, statues, and pictures of this goddess; and the artists who had rendered themselves celebrated by representing her." The essay which obtained the prize, was that of Monsieur Larcher, the well-known translator of Herodotus. With some taste, and immense learning, he amassed almost everything respecting this goddess, to be found in the works of the ancients; and if he did not succeed in composing an agreeable book, his judgment, not his knowledge, was to blame. Hyginus, Apollodorus, and the other ancient mythologists, have left us brief abstracts of the fables concerning Venus; and Tacitus, with that energetic conciseness for which he is remarkable, has given in one page an outline of the whole history of her worship. Before we come to this passage, however, we shall cast a glance over the history of its migration westward through Asia, taking up the thread of the narrative in Assyria.

The earliest notice we find of Venus, is under the name of Mylitta, Mithra, Alitta, etc. By this word, according to the interpretation of Julius Firmicus, the orientals, who represent all the operations of nature allegorically, meant to designate the vivifying power of the universe. Those writers who consider fire the first principle of all things, speak of Venus as the daughter of Cœlus or Ouranos; the Neptunians say she sprang from the foam of the sea; others call her the daughter of Jupiter and Dione. Whatever was her origin, she was from the beginning thought to preside over the union of the sexes; and is spoken of by the mystical Orpheus, as reason is by Lao-tseu, the celebrated Chinese philosopher, as the mother of the universe --- πάντα γὰρ ἐκ σέθεν ἐστὶν, says he, in his hymn to this goddess. Servius also observes to the same effect --- "Dicunt ipsam Venerem esse matrem Deûm." So great and universal was the power of Venus, that she exercised authority even over the fates, the iron goddesses, who resisted all other rule.

From Assyria the worship of Venus passed to Phœnicia, and thence to Cyprus. This worship, which in the course of time degenerated into prostitution, was pure at first, and offered up to Venus Urania, a virgin goddess. Herodotus speaks of a shameful custom which had insinuated itself at Babylon, into the ceremonies of this worship, and afterwards prevailed at Heliopolis of Phœnicia, and at Aphka (Hodie Afka) near Mount Lebanon. Mr. Larcher says that Constantine destroyed the temples, and abolished the infamous custom in the last two cities: but in this he is perfectly mistaken; for, whatever may have been the fate of the temples, the custom still survives, in the midst of other manners, and other creeds. Zosimus, who passes over the practice to which we have alluded, amuses his readers with the fabulous history of a globe of fire or lighted torch, which appeared in the air, in the environs of the temple; and gravely says, that the offerings made to the goddess were thrown into a lake close at hand, and that such as were accepted sunk to the bottom, while those which the divinity of the place refused, floated upon the top.

The remarks of Mr. Larcher on the name Salambo, which according to Hesychius, the Babylonians applied to Venus, are very ingenious. They could not, says he, have made use of this term, since it is a Greek word, derived from σάλα which properly signifies the agitation of the sea, and metaphorically that of the soul. From σάλα is derived σαλαΐζειν, to strike the bosom, as in grief; or to lament the loss of something. Σαλαΐς, groans; σαλάβη, the agitation of the soul. According to the author of the Etymologicum Magnum, Σαλάμβας was a goddess thus named, because she wandered about, weeping for Adonis. Anacreon uses the word σαλαΐζειν in the sense of, "to weep," "to deplore;" for grief and trouble agitate and disturb the soul. Thus, Salambo, signifies Venus lamenting the death of Adonis. Selden supposes Delephat, and the Syrian goddess, to have been identical with Venus. Strabo says she was called Atargatis; and Eratosthenes gives her the name of Derceto.

This Venus, in fact, was known under many different names. According to Cicero, in his work on the Nature of the Gods, she was called Astarte in Syria. It was to this goddess that the Emperor Helagabalus married the new god, which under his own name he had added to the Roman Pantheon. Astarte, who is represented by the Pagans as the wife of Adonis, was worshipped with peculiar honours at Byblos: I have seen, says Lucian, at Byblos, a vast temple dedicated to Venus, in which the orgies of Adonis are celebrated. I have examined these orgies; for pretending that Adonis was killed in their country by the boar, they every year strike themselves in commemoration of this event; they give way to lamentations, perform the prescribed rites, and an air of mourning pervades the whole country. When their weeping and self-tormenting cease, sacrifices, such as are performed in honour of the dead, are offered to Adonis. On the following day he is supposed to return to life, his statue is exposed in the open air, and his worshippers shave their heads, as the Egyptians do at the death of Apis.

This festival was observed in nearly all the countries of the East, to perpetuate, according to the mythologists, the remembrance of the loves of Venus and Adonis. The physical interpretation of this fable we leave to others, persuaded that whatever meaning we might attribute to it, a hundred other interpretations equally probable might be discovered. We shall merely observe that a statue of this goddess, supposed to represent the earth when stripped of its beauty by winter, was found on Mount Libanus, with the left hand enveloped in the drapery, the head covered, the countenance sad; and it was even supposed by some, that tears were represented trickling from the eyes.

Shakespeare, who penetrated with philosophical acuteness into 
the depths of ancient fable, and breathed a new life into worn- 
out legends, has entered with his accustomed truth to nature, into 
the spirit of this magnificent fable. The goddess is represented 
wandering about the mountains, dejected, apprehensive, sorrowful 
